content/modules/ROOT/pages/index.adoc, before:

= {lab_name}

=== Lab Access

To access lab resources, go to: {lab_url}

You will be prompted for a password, which will be provided to you by your lab instructor.

Next, you will be prompted for your name and email address. The values you submit here will be used to get you back into your same environment if anything happens with your PC.

When you reach the "Workbench Information" screen, you are ready to move on.

IMPORTANT: It's highly recommended to put your workbench in its own browser window, in order to have these instructions on one half of your screen and the workbench on the other.

=== Lab Topology

This is the environment you will be working in:

image::00_topology.png[topology]

We will primarily be working with `rtr1`, and sometimes `rtr2`. There are no instructions involving `rtr3` or `rtr4`, but they are relevant in that they are the OSPF neighbors for `rtr1` and `rtr2` respectively. You may use them for testing if desired.

All 4 devices are Cisco routers running IOS-XE.

This information is provided for context; you don't need to memorize it, and no prior knowledge of routing protocols is required to participate in this lab.

Commit message:

link to here from workbench

content/modules/ROOT/pages/index.adoc, after:

= {lab_name}

=== Lab Access

You should have arrived here from the workbench assignment page provided by your lab instructor.

You will be prompted for your name and email address. The values you submit here will be used to get you back into your same environment if anything happens with your PC.

When you see links to lab resources under the "Workbench Information" section, you are ready to move on.

IMPORTANT: It's highly recommended to keep your workbench and these instructions each in their own browser windows. Arrange your screen to have these instructions on one half and your workbench on the other.

=== Lab Topology

This is the environment you will be working in:

image::00_topology.png[topology]

We will primarily be working with `rtr1`, and sometimes `rtr2`. There are no instructions involving `rtr3` or `rtr4`, but they are relevant in that they are the OSPF neighbors for `rtr1` and `rtr2` respectively. You may use them for testing if desired.

All 4 devices are Cisco routers running IOS-XE.

This information is provided for context; you don't need to memorize it, and no prior knowledge of routing protocols is required to participate in this lab.
